Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host. As always, Ricardo Lobs
to the MG by Doctor Matthew mcmanus. He is
a lecturer in the Department of Political Science at
the University of Michigan. He is the author of
several books. And today we're talking about his latest
one, the political theory of liberal socialism. So, Doctor
mcmanus, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Yeah. Thanks so much for inviting me. Uh I
was happy to hear that uh some people in
Portugal are interested in what I'm doing.
Yeah. Sure. So let's start perhaps with some definitions
here before we get into liberal socialism itself. Of
course, I think this is a combination of liberalism
and socialism. So, first of all, tell us what
is liberalism, what is socialism or perhaps about some
of the main tenets that come from each of
them that then come together in liberal socialism. And
then we can talk a little bit more, more
about liberal socialism itself.
Absolutely. So these are actually quite difficult questions uh
in no small part because when we're talking about
doctrines like liberalism or socialism, they've been around for
hundreds of years, many different people have espoused them.
Uh MAJOR philosophers um from very different traditions uh
have aligned with them or criticized them. So I
tend to agree with Doctor Alan Ryan that it
makes more sense to talk about liberalism's plural and
socialism's uh plural uh than a kind of single
unitary doctrine. Uh That means pretty much the same
thing uh everywhere, regardless of circumstance, regardless of ideological
development. So just very briefly, uh I argue that
at the core of liberalism, its moral core is
a commitment to two, perhaps three principles. Uh The
first principle is a commitment to the moral quality
of all human beings. Uh What this just means
is that it's as important that your life goes
well, is that my life goes well, is that
some other person uh in Uganda's life goes well,
et cetera, et cetera. Now, this doesn't mean that
liberals by and large have been committed to social
equality for all individuals or even economic equality for
all individuals. But it does mean that you're supposed
to be granted things like formal legal equality, equality
of rights for you, utilitarian. Uh YOUR needs are
considered equally in kind of a hedonic or aggregated
uh calculus, that kind of thing. Uh The second
principle that I argue liberals are committed to is
this idea of liberty for all. Uh AND that
flows to a certain extent from this commitment to
the moral equality of all individuals because if you
acknowledge that people are moral equals uh entitled to
certain kinds of basic rights or certain um basic
considerations. Uh Then there's something that liberals find worrisome
uh about this idea that I'm in a position
to tell you how to run your life because
I possess superior intellect or superior virtue, or I'm
higher up some kind of social totem pole, you
know, I'm an aristocrat or a priest or whoever
it happens to be. Uh And so from this
commitment to moral equality flows this commitment to certain
kinds uh of basic liberties, right? Freedom of expression,
freedom of speech, toleration for religious views, et cetera,
et cetera. Uh And then last, but not least
I point out that many liberals uh particularly in
continental European traditions are also committed to the principle
of fraternity uh or solidarity. Uh This, of course,
is the third in the trinity of French revolutionary
prudential principles, right? Li uh solidarity or fraternity. Uh
Now many anglo liberals would be wary of expressing
a commitment to fraternity or solidarity, precisely because they
are wary of species of French liberalism. Uh But
there's no doubt that in a continental European context,
this idea of showing solidarity with one's fellow citizens
and emphasizing Republican forms of participation in community has
been essential to many streams of liberal thought.
Mhm uh And so that's about, yeah, I think
you talked mostly about liberalism. What about socialism? I
mean, what aspects of socialism? Then come together with
liberalism in liberal socialism.
Absolutely. Well, the classic definition of socialism uh is
social ownership of the means of production, uh or
even democratic ownership of the means of production. Uh
And again, I'd like to iterate that this has
been understood in vastly different ways uh by different
socialist traditions. Uh Obviously, you have authoritarian forms of
socialism or status forms of socialism. Uh Like what
you saw in the Soviet Union, for example, uh
where this has been understood as state management uh
of the means of production, really party management of
the means of production in many circumstances, right? Uh
But it's also been understood and much more um
individualistic ways by liberal socialists like John Stuart Mill.
Uh WHERE Mill understood this as essentially a commitment
to worker owned uh firms. Uh So, rather than
having capitalists run major economic firms, the workers would
run them themselves and then the state would play
uh an ameliorative role by offering redistribution to the
poor. Sorry, my cat is uh very enthusiastically playing
with the ball around here. Um I also out
that many social uh almost all socialists are committed
to at least in principle the same kind of
moral ideals. Uh As many liberals, if you were
to ask socialists, are you committed to this idea
of liberty for all equality, for all, uh certainly
solidarity uh or fraternity for all. Uh THEY would
of course say yes. Uh BUT all socialists would
point out that it would be impossible to actually
achieve those ideals uh without actually commit oneself to
social ownership or democratic ownership of the means of
production. Precisely because one cannot be truly liberal or
sorry, free. Uh And one certainly cannot be equal
in an economic context where various forms of domination
are given such wide birth. So,
and then liberal socialism, what are the core tenets
of liberal socialism? And how do liberalism and socialism
come together here?
Absolutely. So in my book, uh and in other
writings that people can check out if they're interested,
I say that there are three core principles uh
that define liberal socialism. Uh So just to kind
of provide a little bit of um description by
contrast, um I say that liberal socialism is one
species of liberalism and indeed one species of socialism,
it is committed to these basic principles. But by
no means, would all liberals or socialists also be
committed to these principles? And we can get into
some of these contrasts later on if you wish.
But the first principle, I argue all liberal socialists
are committed to uh is a commitment to normative
individualism and methodological collectivism. Uh Now, those are pretty
technical terms. Uh But by me, methodological collectivism, what
I just mean is that liberal socialists uh view
human beings the same way that Aristotle would understand
human beings or Mill would understand human beings or
for that matter, Marx would understand human beings that
we're fundamentally social animals and that we can only
realize our full of human potentials uh in a
social setting. Uh Now, this can seem like a
rather abstract point, but I actually think it's extremely
concrete, right? So, uh oftentimes I'll talk to my
students and I'll ask them, uh have you had
a happy moment in your life? Like a genuinely
happy moment? Uh Most of them will say yes,
a few of them say no. And that always
worries me. Uh But then I'll ask them as
a follow up. Uh Were you by yourself when
you enjoy this happy moment? Uh And invariably, they'll
always say no, of course not, right? I was
with my friends, I was with my family, my
boyfriend, my girlfriend, even my husband uh for some
of the older students. Uh And I point out,
well, this is a nice demonstration uh of what
Aristotle Hagel marks uh Mill we're talking about, right?
That um it's only uh in social conditions with
other people that we can realize our full human
potentials. Uh If you are left alone on an
island like Robinson crusoe with all the resources in
the world, but no one to interact with. Uh
AND no one to realize your capacities with people
would be very, very unhappy, very quickly. Think about
like Will Smith uh in the I Am Legend
movie, right? Uh So that's the methodological collectivism bit.
Uh The normative individualism. Bit as I point out
that all liberal socialists are committed to the idea
that it is the development of the individuals uh
human capacities uh that is of moral importance uh
for people, people who are committed to this doctrine.
Uh Not for instance, the flourishing of some rafi
abstraction like the nation or civilization uh or people
or the VK, for example. Uh Now, this might
seem self evident uh to some people uh who
are committed to certain forms of normative individualism. Uh
But it's, of course, by no means, self evident
to those who take a more vish uh approach
to morality. Uh I think it's appropriate for the
individual to occasionally be um sacrificed uh for the
good of the greater community. Liberal socialists would have
no truck with that. Uh And contemporaneously, some liberal
socialists uh or people who are aligned with left
egalitarianism at the least uh would say that we
also have to take into account future generations. Um
So that's an interesting philosophical question. We don't need
to get into it right now. Uh But the
argument would be that future individuals that are almost
certainly going to come to be, uh they are
entitled to certain kinds of uh weightings uh and
felicitas that we might make. So that's the first
principle of liberal socialism that I say everyone is
committed to. Uh AND probably the most important one,
the second principle uh of liberal socialism that I
think everyone is committed to is to what I
call a developmental rather than an inquisitive ethic. Uh
Now again, these are technical terms, but I'll start
off by talking about the inquisitive ethic because I
think that um the contrast of the developmental ethic
becomes more clear that way. So, an inquisitive ethic
um is a term that is um drawn from
CB mcpherson, the great Canadian political theorist in his
book, The uh Political Theory of possessive individualism. And
in this book, Mill or Sorry mcpherson is very
critical uh of proto liberal thinkers like Locke or
Hobbs uh arguing that they had this very atomic
understanding of human beings uh as more or less
purely self interested, uh highly competitive. Uh AND they
defined life more or less uh in terms of
the pursuit of desire after desire, right? The acquisition
of goods to gratify our hedonic urges. Um And
you know, the understanding of human beings that emerges
from this is uh the richer I am and
the more stuff that I have and the more
I'm able to outcompete other people to get all
those riches and all that stuff. Uh The better
off I'm doing. Uh And mcpherson was very critical
of this uh for the same reason, say Aristotle
would be very critical of it. Uh And this
is what leads me to the developmental ethic uh
where I say we should commit ourselves, not to
this idea that human beings are made happy by
acquiring a lot of stuff. Uh Instead, we should
realize that most human beings are much happier when
their fundamental human faculties or their fundamental human capacities
are developed uh in certain kinds of refined ways.
And this is a point that Mill uh especially
made very emphatically uh inspired by the German philosopher
uh Humboldt, right? Uh WHERE Mill said most people
get a lot more satisfaction out of starting off
uh as a father and becoming a good father
and a better father over time, right? Developing those
capacities uh or wanting to write a book, maybe
failing a couple of times. Uh ANYBODY who's a
writer will know, you know, that's kind of part
of the process uh and then getting better and
better over time uh as they start to develop
those faculties, uh or, you know, think about a
musician, right? Uh Nobody is especially good at the
violin uh when they first pick it up. Uh
I know my sister plays the violin and she
really struggled with it at the beginning. But, you
know, you take lessons, you practice, you put in
the time and eventually you get better at doing
that. Uh So liberal socialists are committed to the
idea that it's this developmental ethic uh that we
should be fostering instead of the acquisitive ethic. Uh
BECAUSE it's the development of human capacities in harmonious
social settings uh that make people happy rather than
again, uh just acquiring a lot of stuff to
gratify our human urges. It's not that, that is
completely unimportant. Obviously, we need food, shelter, uh you
know, cars uh now, especially uh in order to
fulfill our basic functions. Uh BUT it's not the
be all and end all in life and then
the very last principle uh of liberal socialism and
then I promise I'll stop. Um Is this commitment
to the realization of economic democracy uh in a
liberal democratic political context uh that includes respect for
the basic liberal rights. Uh YOU know, of course,
freedom of expression, freedom of religion, uh freedom of
assembly, but does not put the same kind of
maximal weight on the importance of private property that
classical liberals for instance would think is absolutely sacrosanct.
So for instance, all liberal socialists would say uh
one is not entitled to private ownership of the
means of production, particularly where private ownership of the
means of production. On the hand in the hands
of capital will lead to the emergence of new
forms of domination. In fact, liberal socialists insist that
we need to extend liberal principles um of democracy,
non domination and um basic rights into the economy
precisely protect workers against the potential forms of domination
that can emerge in private government as Elizabeth Anderson
would put it. So those are the three core
principles of liberal socialism as I understand them. Uh
ALL liberal socialist thinkers that I talk about in
my book, understand these in slightly various ways. And
some of them put more emphasis on the one
rather than the other and we can get into
that a little bit if you'd like. But I
think that that's the normative core, uh, of the
doctrine.
Mhm. And how do people tend to react to
a term such as liberal socialism, particularly the liberals
and the socialists when they're, when they see this
term and they feel like they are lumped together
into one single uh theory, one single ideology, let's
say, um I mean, are there aspects that particularly
that people think that from liberalism, socialist would contradict
each other and they see perhaps problems with it?
Yeah, absolutely. So, um for a certain generation uh
of figures that are weaned on what Samuel Moyne
calls Cold War liberalism, uh They see liberal socialism
as just an oxymoronic idea, right? Because they usually
will make claims like uh while liberalism is committed
to individualism, where socialism is committed to collectivism, uh
or liberalism is committed to individual rights and democracy
where socialism is inherently status uh and authoritarian, right?
Uh Now I want to be clear there without
a doubt, authoritarian forms of socialism uh that have
no respect that have had no respect for rights.
Uh And anyone with even an inkling of sympathy
for the liberal tradition, uh would want to be
very, very critical of that and reject it emphatically.
Uh But I point out that this understanding uh
is very historically inaccurate, right? Uh And it's frankly
quite contemporary, right? It's just a product uh of
the kind of Cold War environment uh where the
simplistic bifurcations were ideologically uh important for a lot
of people to try to make sense of why
it is uh that many liberal states were rival
risk uh with communist states. Uh But more sophisticated
understandings of the liberal tradition in particular. Uh Certainly
those that are coming out recently have pointed out
that through the 19th century, up until the early
20th century, uh liberals like John Stuart Mill um
or for that matter, John Maynard Keynes, John Dewey.
Uh WE'RE very happy uh to learn from socialists
to even identify a socialist in many circumstances. Uh
And to draw an elective affinity or symmetry uh
between the egalitarian Liberator and humanist goals of liberalism
and the egalitarian humanist and Liberator goals uh of
liberalism. Uh SINCE both our enlightenment doctrines, arguably even
mature enlightenment doctrines. Uh So part parcel of my
project uh is one of historical clarification uh where
I tried to indicate that this bifurcation uh between
liberalism and socialism uh that became quite common uh
in the mid to late 20th century. Uh IS
a historical abnormality uh that underplays the long dialogue
that has existed between the two traditions. And part
of what I'm hoping to do is, of course,
we start that dialogue since I think it was
fruitful and productive. Even. Of course, it could be
acrimonious at different points.
So let's talk a little bit about the historical
background of his o of uh liberal socialism here.
So how far back do you think we would
need to go to understand the origins of liberal
socialism?
Yeah, it's a good question. So I, I want
to make clear my own limitations, right? So uh
my work is as the title would suggest a
work of political theory. So I merely mainly trace
the origins of liberal socialism and thought uh by
looking at uh important political theorists and political thinkers
who systematize uh insights about the relationship between liberalism
and socialism uh or offer schemas of liberal socialism
uh in a fairly refined way, right? Uh Someone
who approaches um the liberal or socialist traditions from
a different standpoint, uh like, say Edmund Fas uh
like Edmund Fawcett uh might take a ton of
different tech. Uh But in my case, I start
the story that I'm telling uh with Thomas Payne
and Mary Wolston craft, uh two liberal thinkers uh
or proto liberal thinkers depending on who you talk
to uh that have been wildly uh influential. So
for those who don't know, uh I'll start by
talking about Thomas Payne and then I'll move on
to Wilson craft. Uh Thomas Payne uh was an
enormously important revolutionary thinker uh in the late 18th
century. Uh Many people see him as the chief
ideologue actually of not one but two revolutions, the
American revolution and the French revolution. Uh So, in
the case of the American revolution, his most famous
contribution is a pamphlet called Common Sense. Uh Common
Sense in the American tradition is one of the
great works uh of political literature uh is widely
read uh to the troops uh fighting in the
revolutionary armies. Um Because um it just offered a
scathing indictment uh of the British aristocracy uh pointing
out that it was a ridiculous idea. Uh And
making a case for a Republican system of government
that's respectful uh of the rights of man. Um
So see from this standpoint, uh if you just
look at common sense, Payne looks an awful lot
like a kind of an American liberal, right, very
committed to individual rights, limited government, uh Republican forms
of participation, that kind of thing. Uh But as
I point out in the book, his opinion starts
to shift in a more egalitarian direction by the
time of the second half of an important book
he writes called The Rights of Man and in
pamphlets like uh a gray injustice. And a lot
of this was inspired by the second revolution. Payne
was part of uh the French revolution. So in
the first parts of the Rights of Man, uh
Payne offers just a scathing indictment of the conservative
Edmund Burke uh who wrote an important uh pamphlet
um or sorry book criticizing the French revolution called
Reflections On the Revolution in France, which people should
also read if they get a chance. Uh But
in the second half of the rights of man,
uh Payne makes some very interesting arguments about private
property uh where he starts to suggest uh that
private property is not a natural institution, the way
that say lock and sub limbers thought it was.
Uh IT'S very much a social institution. Uh It
came about uh as a kind of artificial uh
social project uh where people who have a lot
of property in effect, dispossessed, uh those who do
not have a lot of property. Uh Now Payne
argues, it's not necessarily the worst thing in the
world for people to have private property because he
thinks that that is vital uh to incentivize things
like cultivation. Uh But he says, look, if you
possess an enormous amount of private property, uh and
you have dispossessed people de facto uh by owning
it, uh then you owe society and especially the
poor, a debt for the possession of that private
property. Uh And this becomes even more vehement uh
in agrarian justice uh where he says there's this
enormous amount of reverence that is paid to private
property uh that borders on a fetish uh or
even a kind of mystical ideology. Uh And he
says that as the world becomes more mature, we're
gonna start to see uh this fetish become considerably
depleted uh in terms of its ideological power. So,
from these kinds of extrapolations, uh Payne goes on
to argue for essentially a welfare state. Uh One
of the first people to kind of offer systematic
arguments to that effect. So just kind of very
briefly, um summarize uh what Payne argues. Uh He
claims that people should get um a universal pension
uh after the age of 50 that should become
more generous when they hit the age of 65.
Uh He thinks that all education should be free
uh for anybody who is capable. Uh He argues
for guaranteed employment and not just guaranteed employment, but
quality employment. Uh FOR anybody who wants it, particularly
in major urban cities. Uh He also argues that
women should receive a stipend uh after giving birth
uh for their troubles. Uh AND also to kind
of help give themselves and their Children a head
start in life. Uh And then he also argues
that at the um upon reaching the age of
maturity, uh all people should receive what amounts to
a universal inheritance, right? Uh QUITE generous for the
time uh again, to kind of get them started
off in life uh in the era of their
maturity. Uh So there are other kind of things
that he proposes also about meals and so on,
but we don't need to get into that. Uh
But all flows from this commitment pain has that
property is an artificial social institution, nonna institution, it
might have certain uses. Uh But clearly, he thinks
uh an excess amount of reverence to private property
ceases to be useful when allows mass concentrations of
wealth. Uh When that wealth could be better used
to ameliorate the condition of the poor and indeed
even ameliorate the condition of the working classes. Uh
So let's move on to Mary Woolston Craft. Uh
So in Woolston Kraft's case, uh she's probably best
known for her classic book, a vindication of the
Rights of women, uh which is an early feminist
classic arguing as the title suggests, uh that the
rights of women uh should be taken very seriously.
Uh But less well known is the fact that
she was just a scathing critic uh of inequalities
uh of property. Uh So, for instance, and a
vindication of the rights of women, uh she takes
aim in this case at the aristocracy. Uh And
she says that from this reverence, people pay to
private property uh flows like a poison as though
from a poison chalice. Uh ALMOST all the ills
uh that appear in our society today, uh particularly
the corrosion uh of our moral virtues. Uh And
she points out this is because the rich almost
invariably tend to assume uh that they are somehow
responsible for their own riches. Uh Even if they
just have to inherit them as if by magic.
Uh AND align with this is this tendency to
either ignore the poor uh or just to instinctively
assume that the poor are somehow to blame. Uh
FOR their circumstances, even though a moment's reflection would
suggest that it's not. Uh NOW I would submit
that this is a point that um Wolson Kraft
took from Adam Smith, uh who also uh made
this exact same argument in his uh theory of
moral sentiments, uh where he pointed out how, um
it's the reverence of the rich uh in our
society that is by far uh the greatest corruptor
uh of our moral sentiments. Uh I can't necessarily
uh establish that because she doesn't directly cite Smith
in this passage, but she's well known to have
been an avid reader of Smith and had quite
a lot of admiration for her some. And so
I'm thinking that's where it comes from. Uh And
then later on in her um letters uh where
she's talking about her journey through uh Sweden Norway
and Denmark, uh which were not the Nordic States
uh that they eventually were to become, they were
highly anti uh highly um aristocratic estates uh in
the 19th century. Uh She starts to direct more
of her ire towards the emerging capitalist class. Uh
So she didn't just have nasty things to say.
Let's put it about this uh that way about
the aristocracy. Uh So she actually compares early capitalists
in northern Germany. Uh And I quote to a
fungus uh that spreads every uh everywhere always. Uh
And she points out that the kind of novo
rich that are emerging um in big industry, uh,
very rarely do anything that's particularly valuable. Uh, BUT
they very much like to applaud themselves for the
very little that they do end up doing. Uh,
AND much worse, she points out, uh, they have
displayed very, very few virtues of character or intellect.
Uh They almost always assume to paraphrase, uh, that
the main point in life is to make as
much money as possible. Uh, THAT one owes no
duties of care to one's fellow human beings. Uh
Because in the pursuit of profit, uh and they
adopt almost a suspicious attitude to anyone uh that
suggests that they should do anything uh for another
person. Uh And she points out that this kind
of nullity, uh this empty void uh of avarice
and greed is what is taken to be an
ideal in many of these societies right now. Uh
And again, Good Smith in that she is, uh
she just thinks that this is beyond contempt uh
and potentially very dangerous uh in terms of the
effect it might have on the broader moral culture
of the era. Uh Now, Wilson Kraft was not
a uh socialist. Uh THAT term wasn't even in
the lexicon at that point. Uh But she does
argue persuasively uh that a more moral society will
emerge in the event that we ameliorate uh inequalities
of property quite substantially. Uh And she even gives
a kind of um the only way to describe
it is like macho uh argument for this. Uh
Wilson Kraft was quite prone to leaning very heavily
on like male forms of argumentation. Uh As some
commentators have pointed out, uh and partly to offset
the accusation that uh she was too effeminate, maybe
we could be critical of that. Uh But she
said things like, look, uh you know, I tough
minded virtuous person doesn't want to live in a
highly unequal society. Uh BECAUSE a tough minded virtuous
person wants to live in a society uh where
he is treated as an equal and where he
treats other people as an equal. Uh Because that's
the only kind of society where people are going
to display the requisite virtues that morality requires to
one another. Uh So, unfortunately, Wilson Kraft died um
and th age 38 of childbirth uh before any
of these thoughts were systematized. Uh And another great
work uh who knows where she might have gone.
Uh Had she continued to write. Uh But I
point out that in Bane and Wolson Kraft case,
uh you start to see uh the emergence of
a kind of liberal socialist outlook uh where in
both of the authors, uh they're drawing a tight
connection between this need uh to ameliorate the extraordinarily
corrosive effects of inequalities of property in order to
more securely put um liberal and Republican principles uh
on a firm foundation,
but they weren't liberal socialists yet or were they?
No, I, I say that they aren't. Right. I
mean, let's be clear. Right? Socialism as a distinct
political and economic ideology, uh only really emerged in
the early 19th century uh with the Santas, the
Owen nights, uh and others. Uh So they, of
course, would not call themselves a liberal socialist because
uh even the term liberal uh wasn't particularly popular
at that point. Right. The term liberal really enters
the political exon uh around, you know, 1812, 1815,
1818 in Spain, uh when Los liberal um argued
for a new constitution uh because they don't want
a restoration uh of the cult out of all
kind of uh aristocratic monarchy. Uh So they're not
liberal socialists yet. I argue that you can only
really call uh a major intellectual liberal socialist when
we get to John Stewart Mill.
OK. So tell us then about Jon Stewart Mill,
what makes him or made in your understanding the
first liberal socialist?
Yeah, absolutely. So, um this isn't just a claim
that I've made, by the way, I want to
uh pay due diligence and point out that um
there's been a recent suite of scholarship on Mill,
all very good uh which has foregrounded the egalitarian
dimensions uh of his economic thought. Uh Probably the
best book in this respect uh is a magnificent
tome by uh my good friend Helen mccabe uh
for Queen's mcgill University Press. Uh She wrote a
book called John Stuart Mill Socialist. Uh VERY readable
very short, uh strongly recommend people kick it up.
But you can also look at the recent books
by uh Elizabeth Anderson, for example, um excuse me,
um or Edmund Fawcett, anyone like that is good.
Uh So Jos Street Mill is probably best known
for his fierce defense uh of individualism and personal
liberty, right? Uh If you're an undergraduate student, certainly
in a country like I'm from uh Canada and
you're doing an undergraduate degree in any social science,
uh inevitably at some point or another, somebody's gonna
sign you at least a couple chapters of uh
Mill's classic book on liberty, uh which includes a
strident defense of individualism, free speech. Um YOU know,
particularly free political speech, very, very stirring stuff, right?
Uh Less appreciated is the fact that Mill overtly
identified as a socialist in his autobiography, uh where
he points out how he is deeply wary uh
of certain kinds of authoritarian forms of socialism. Uh
But nonetheless, he proudly identifies under the general designation
of socialists as he puts it. Uh And he
looks forward to a day uh where um the
kind of goods uh that are produced in a
society uh will be distributed more equally. Uh AND
particularly uh where the goods of society uh will
be more likely to fall into the hands of
those who actually produce most of the goods of
society. Uh NAMELY the workers. Uh So following mccabe,
um Mills, socialism is pretty idiosyncratic to him. Uh
Like any other great thinker, he's not a follower,
he's very much an intellectual leader. Uh So he
develops his own unique understanding of what this will
entail. Uh And I argue in the book that
Mills and liberal socialism uh has two major features.
Uh The first again, is this commitment to the
idea that capitalists really don't do all that much.
Uh If in the economy, uh yes, they provide
the initial capital often because they've inherited it. Uh
But in terms of work skill contribution, uh mel
points out it's extremely minor when you compare it
to the people who, you know, actually build cars,
make, you know, build uh you know, uh computers,
build microchips, whatever it happens to be. Uh So
he says for the most part, a mature economy
uh would do away with capitalists as kind of
a frivolous uh even indulged uh kind of decadence.
Uh And we would just allow the workers to
run the firms where they work at. Uh He
says that they're more likely to be uh efficient
in doing this because they're the ones who actually
build the cars and market the cars uh and
understand how the cars work than the capitalist. Uh
And he says, even if uh we lose something
in efficiency because of the, it'll still be beneficial
uh to move towards a co-operative kind of economy
because he thinks that workers who are producing for
themselves uh are more likely to distribute uh the
profits from the firm amongst themselves in a relatively
even way. And he also thinks it will morally
uplift them uh because he feels that there's something
servile. Uh AND this is where the liberalism comes
up, right? Uh And uh basically undignified uh about
being someone in a subordinate position uh in an
economic firm. Uh MILL doesn't care for that because
he thinks that people should be, you know, individuals
uh and look after themselves and he just doesn't
think that's possible in a firm uh where your
boss basically gets to tell you when to arrive,
when you can eat, what you can wear all
those kinds of things. Uh And Mill doesn't have
a lot of truck with that. Uh The second
component of a mills and socialist society is, of
course, Mill starts to argue for various forms of
state redistribution, right? Uh So mccay points out that
this includes things like provisions for public education, public
health, uh certain kinds of protections for the poor.
Um Nothing that is especially uh generous by say
20th century standards. Uh But certainly by 19th century
standards, uh the kind of welfare state or proto
welfare state uh that Mill argues for uh was
quite expansive. Uh And I agree with Elizabeth Anderson
that had he lived uh into the 20th century
and seen the advent of things like Nordic social
democracy, for example. Uh AND um the kinds of
social security that provided there, there's very little evidence
to suggest that he would not sign off on
it uh very quickly given that he was already
very much on the bleeding edge uh of arguing
for redistributive policies by the uh 19th century. Uh
So I wanna acknowledge mills socialism or liberal socialism
uh also has serious limitations. Uh So my book
is not a, a hagiography of these figures. Uh
I point out that uh liberal socialist theory and
liberal socialist practice failed uh for a lot of
different reasons. Uh And there's also pretty substantial moral
deficiencies uh in to my mind, at least in
a lot of the figures. Uh So, uh Mills,
uh I'm very critical for example of his endorsement
of imperialism. Uh And frankly, the racist attitudes he
took towards people in India and many parts of
the globe uh where he would insist that one
day uh they might be ready for things like
self governance governance. Uh But despotism is appropriate uh
for people who are in a kind of childlike
situation. Uh We need to kind of uh assume
control over their business until they're mature enough uh
to assume control of it for themselves. Uh I
think that that's a pretty um awful view to
take. Uh And I'm quite critical of Mill for
that. Uh I also follow Marx in being critical
of Mill's uh view that um see it, we
could kind of um just engage in reformist enterprises.
Uh TO move towards uh a cooper economy. Uh
I agree with marks that this is probably almost
invariably going to entail more pushback from capital. Uh
And so certain forms of struggle are gonna be
necessary if we're going to change relations of production
in such a foundational way. Uh Nonetheless, I think
that mills liberal socialism is a noble but flawed
beginning. Uh I think is the way that I
put it in the book. Uh Kind of echoing
Martha Nos Baum's famous title. Uh Not Perfect but
definitely a pretty good and pretty auspicious start.
So you mentioned Karl Marx there, tell us a
little bit more about him. I mean, what would
he have to say about liberal socialism? And what
do you think from his work would contribute to
liberal socialism?
Well, I think that Marx would be very critical
uh of elements of liberal socialism, but in a
sophisticated way, right? So um I'm drawing very heavily
here uh on works like uh Igor Shuka Broad's
revisiting uh Karl Marx's Critique of Liberalism. Uh AND
also the work of people like say uh J
A Cohen, for example. Uh So what Shuga Broad
points out is that uh it is very easy
to overstate uh and even treat unal electrically. Uh
Marx's critique of liberalism, you see this online, right?
All the time, right? Where people say uh Karl
Marx hated liberalism, wanted to destroy liberalism, uh was
anti liberal, you know, his very bones uh And
what shaker broad reminds us is that that is
very much an anti Marxist kind of position to
take uh almost moralistic in a certain way. Uh
So Shaker Broad points out that in his early
years and Rodney Peer points out the same thing
in his book, um Marxism, uh and Morality and
Social Justice. Uh So Marx in his early years
was a liberal, a radical liberal. Uh HE argued
for things like freedom of expression and particularly freedom
of the press. Uh It's very understandable when you
think that he was running various newspapers agitating for
political form in autocratic Germany and they kept shutting
down his newspapers and destroying his livelihood, right? Would
he not be uh committed to those things? Uh
And Marx was extremely critical uh of certain forms
of bourgeois reformism. Obviously, he had nothing but contempt
for John Strip Mills most of the time, right?
Uh Even though he did think that he was
a more impressive figure than the mere vulgar economist.
Uh But it's important to note that Mill also
argued that the bourgeois was, of course the most
revolutionary class that had ever existed. Uh And had
undoubtedly brought about the freest most equal, most productive
society that had ever existed. Uh And I think
that this is something that is sometimes missed uh
in vulgar Marxist uh kind of critiques uh of
liberalism and even capitalism, right? Uh If you look
at the Communist Manifesto, right, it's very clear that
Marx and Engels both say that bourgeois has brought
about wonders that the world has never seen. Uh
And they mean that as a positive thing, right?
It has swept away all the old venerable prejudices,
uh and forced man to confront his real conditions
uh for the first time. Uh So in terms
of Marx's mature approach to socialism, uh I agree
with Chuck abroad and others that he's very insistent
uh that any kind of view uh of socialism
that entails it being a millenarian break uh from
bourgeois society uh is invariably utopian in the bad
sense and doomed to failure. Uh This comes through
most clearly in his classic piece, uh a critique
of the Gotha program, right, where he points out
that there's this kind of socialist idea that holds
uh we can just break from the old society
and build an entirely new one as if from
some magical blueprint. Uh And Mark says no, right?
Uh The reality is that if we are good
historical materialists, we need to recognize that any socialist
society to emerge even after a big revolution is
going to be to use his term stamped uh
by many features of the old society. Uh We're
not going to transcend what he calls bourgeois, right?
Or bourgeois ri uh in a day or a
month or even a couple of years. Uh And
we're gonna need to maintain a lot of those
institutions and those practices uh in a transitional phase
that could last men very, very long time uh
on the road to whatever you wanna call it,
full communism, right? Uh WHERE we could finally uh
indulge in the moral principle of uh from each
according to his ability to each according to his
means uh to his needs. Excuse me. Uh So
what I point out drawing upon this is, it's
very clear that Marx would be critical of bourgeois
reformism uh of the sort that Mill endorsed, arguing
that it does not take into sufficient account, the
forms of power uh that are present in the
relations of production. Uh And it's naivete on these
limits. Uh It's been aspiratory capacity. Uh And I
want to point out as somebody who is an
enormously who is enormously influenced and enormously fond of
Marx. I think that that's a legitimate criticism of
the liberal socialist tradition that we can get into
that later on. Uh But I also think it's
important to note that Marx would be, was more
sympathetic to many elements of liberalism uh than some
of his most uh vulgar appropriators appreciate. Uh And
again, following shook abroad and uh my reading of
the Critique of the Gotha program, he was also
pretty insistent that liberalism is not just going to
go away in a socialist society. Uh EVEN if
people wanted to uh and the expectation that it
would go away is Ahist and anti materialist.
Mhm So before we move on to other topics,
there's one last major figure that I would like
to ask you about it is John Rawls. So
what, which of his ideas can be associated with
liberal socialism?
Sure. Well, for those of your listeners who don't
know. Um SO John Rawls is probably the most
famous American political philosopher, not probably just is most
famous American political philosopher of the 20th century uh
author uh of a really long and tedious but
very interesting book called The Theory of Justice. Uh
I say it's long and tedious because, you know,
it's very, very technical, very academic, you know, walls
was a professor at Harvard University and he writes
like it. Uh So at the core of his
argument uh is a thought experiment uh uh that
leads to two principles of justice. Uh So Mill
says, oh sorry. Uh Ra says, I want us
to imagine um a group of people who are
choosing principles to govern what he calls the basic
structure of society. Uh And it's important to note
that Rawles is saying these principles are going to
apply to the basic structure of society. Uh Because
that is a subtle but very important shift in
liberal thinking that Raws enacts uh earlier liberals would
insist that actually the first subject of justice as
Rawles would put it uh is the individual and
their rights. Uh Raw says, no, no, it's actually
the basic structure that is the first subject of
justice. Uh And then his lectures of Political Philosophy,
he points out that this is something that he
picked up directly from Hegel. Um And by extension,
certain kinds of Marxism, right? Because uh he recognized
upon reading Hegel uh that again, uh human beings
are social animals. There's the methodological collectivism for you.
Uh And it's only within a just basic structure
uh that individual rights and individual flourishing can be
guaranteed. So just wanted to pause right there. So
his reasoners uh have special restrictions uh imposed upon
their political epistemology uh where he says, uh look,
uh these are individuals who are self interested, they're
neither angels or devils. Uh They more or less
want to be uh well taken care of in
whatever society they uh wind up creating. Uh And
they have knowledge of basic facts by human psychology,
human economics, uh human history, that kind of thing.
Uh But they don't know uh many of the
particulars about who they are going to be as
individuals, they don't know uh their sex, they don't
know their class position. Uh They don't know their
religious orientation. Uh Many contemporary rigs have also pointed
out sexual orientation would probably fall behind uh what
he calls the veil of ignorance, et cetera. Uh
So they exist behind a veil of ignorance uh
As you it in an original position. Uh And
Rawles wanted this idea to capture uh certain kinds
of canon uh ideas about the importance of reasoning
about morality and politics from a position of rationality
and impartiality. Right. Uh, BECAUSE he thought, argued, I
think quite persuasively that very often when, uh, we
reason morally about issues, uh, we would do so
in a very slanted way. Uh, THAT'S intended to
favor our own interests and our own dispositions. Right.
Uh, YOU know, Catholics, uh, will almost invariably sit
there and think, uh, we'd all be better off
if we live in a Catholic society, which people
always think we'd be better off living in a
society where income taxes were lower, you get the
idea. So this way, you know, uh, this kind
of information is removed from people's reasoning. So they
can't reason in that way. Uh, THEY have to
think more about what it would be like to
enter into society. Uh, IF there was someone who
adopted, uh, different kinds of viewpoints or was in
a different situation than themselves. So to make a
very long and very technical story, a little shorter.
Uh, Rawles argues that there are two really three
principles of justice that people would adopt behind this
veil of ignorance in what it calls the original
position. Uh, THE first is a principle of justice
that is committed to, uh, equal liberties for all,
uh, at least equal liberties, compatible, uh, with the
same equal liberties for everyone else. Um There's some
complicated questions we can ask about that but we'll
put that aside, right now, the more important one
is uh the second principle of justice, really, the
two other principles of justice. Uh FIRST off that
people need to have fair quality of opportunity uh
to access things like uh jobs and opportunities uh
and um social positions in their society. Uh And
secondly, he argues for um what's called the difference
principle, this idea that social and economic inequalities in
a society are, are justifiable. Uh But only if
you can demonstrate that those social and economic inequalities
work to the benefit of the least well off.
Uh And I want to point out only the
least well off, right. Uh So it's from the
standpoint of the least well off that you adjudicate
how just your society is. So for a long
time, uh raws theory of justice uh was interpreted
to be kind of a left liberal protos social
democratic uh defense of the mid century welfare state
uh of the sort that you see emerging uh
in many European countries uh or for that matter,
to a lesser extent. Um And for instance, um
FDR Lyndon Johnson's United States, you know, think about
the uh New Deal or the Great Society programs.
But interestingly enough, Rawles actually explicitly rejected that interpretation
of his work by the time of uh justice's
fairness, a restatement uh which is the last book
that he wrote kind of a Swan song um
summarizing uh some responses to criticisms and kind of
re articulating uh the whole theory. So in this
book, uh raw says, look, the problem with welfare
states uh is even though they're clearly superior and
he wants to be very obvious about that uh
to unbridled capitalism just better in every way. Uh
They still permit too many inequalities that are clearly
not to the benefit of the least well off.
Uh And just as importantly, uh the kind of
inequalities that they allow in economic terms, align with
uh or generate probably a baby term uh political
inequality because people who are really, really rich uh
for pretty obvious reasons tend to like to use
that money uh in order to obtain political power.
Uh And this means that the fair quality uh
of basic liberties or fair value of basic liberties
uh particularly political liberties. So central uh to many
facets of liberalism are undermined uh by uh economic
inequality. Uh So he says really the only kind
of society that could properly instantiate our society that
could potentially instantiate uh liberal justice as Rawles understands
it uh would either be what he calls a
property owning democracy uh or a liberal socialist society.
Uh And in other works, like his lectures again
on political philosophy, uh He lays out certain kinds
of uh co tenants uh that he would associate
with liberal socialism. You can talk about them if
you want. I've already talked for a very long
time. Uh But I think that there's a lot
going, uh, to this role as you envision. Uh,
AND, um, I'm very sympathetic to it in many
respects as I'm sure, uh, came through in the
book.
Mhm. Right. So, uh, let me ask you now,
how does liberal socialism relate to something like social
democracy?
Yeah, it's a good question. So, uh, I agree
with Scott Sahan. Uh, Scott Sahan is a logician,
uh, who wrote a great recent book called Socialism.
Uh A Logical Defense. People should read it if
they get a chance. Uh But he points out
correctly, I think uh that it's very easy again
to uh think about political and economic systems uh
in these kind of bifurcated terms, right? You're either
a socialist society or a capitalist society, you're a
liberal society or an authoritarian society. And he points
out that in the real world, uh oftentimes what
we see instead is a continuum uh of different
practices or a blend of different practices, right? Uh
And country in the world really has a mixed
economy, right? Where the state does some things, private
actors, do some things. Uh AND sometimes uh even
international actors will do certain kinds of things. Uh
And the argument that Scott Sahan points out is
that uh the line between social democracy and socialism
uh is somewhat blurry, right? Um There's a continuum
uh uh sorry, the difference operates on a continuum
rather than a strict either or. Uh SO the,
that I interpret this difference is that social democracy,
generally speaking, uh has been much more oriented around
redistributive policies uh that are intended to ameliorate inequality
and particularly to ameliorate the worst consequences of poverty
rather than changing uh relations to production, to use
the Marxist term. Uh BY, for instance, uh fundamentally
challenging the power of capital or fundamentally challenging um
the wage labor uh relationship. Uh And I argue
that in a liberal socialist society, uh we would
definitely want to engage in uh intensive redistributive schemess.
Uh I agree with Mill and Rawles about that.
Uh But a good liberal social society would want
to be much more militant uh in trying to
challenge the forms of domination that exist at the
level of the relations of production by moving towards
something like uh workplace democracy. Uh WHICH again is
very much an idea that I draw from John
Stuart Mill. Uh Now how this could be done
practically. Uh I actually don't really have very much
to say about that, unfortunately. Uh BECAUSE uh as
somebody who operates in kind of a theoretical vein,
uh practice isn't always uh my strong point. So
I leave it to uh others who are far
smarter on this point than I am. Uh If
they like the idea to kind of take it
forward and roll with it. But I think that
would be the kind of core difference between a
social democrat uh and a liberal socialist. Although I
want to point out again, uh, this is a
difference of degree in many cases, uh, rather than
a kind of strict either or
so earlier, we've talked a little bit about Karl
Marx. What about communism specifically? I mean, how, how
would social or liberal socialism relate to communism?
So, it's a really good question, especially with relation
to, uh, Marxist understanding communism. So, as everybody knows,
um, at least anybody who spent any time in
left circles anywhere. Uh The unfortunate reality is Marx
and Engels wrote very, very, very little about communism,
right? Um If you were to add up everything
that they had to say about it uh Over
decades, uh it probably wouldn't amount to much more
than 100 pages, right? Uh Which if you compare
it to the thousands of pages uh that they
wrote about capital uh or even the hundreds of
pages that they would write about idiosyncratic uh idealist
philosophers like Mike Steiner. It's not very much, right.
Uh So it's hard to actually say what the
Marxist vision of communism looks like. Uh JUST because
they didn't really have very much to say about
it, right? Uh In terms of what we can
extrapolate, uh I would say that liberal socialists share
with Marx the vision that he laid out quite
beautifully actually. Uh IN capital volume three. So I
talked earlier about the developmental ethic, right? This idea
that it's the development of human capacities or human
powers uh that should be the end of a
good society. Uh And in capital volume three, Marx
expressly aligns himself uh with this ethic if you
want to call it that uh although he probably
wouldn't want to call it an ethic. Uh So
Mark says, look uh in capitalist society, it is
definitely the case uh that certain kinds of human
powers are developed by capital. Um YOU know, to
go back to the Adam Smith example, if I
am the owner of a pin factory and you
work in my pin factory, then needless to say,
I want to help you develop your power to
make pins more effectively because that'll be beneficial to
me for pretty obvious reasons. Uh The problem is
that I'm only gonna want to develop your powers
to make pins uh because that's the only thing
that is profitable for my firm. Uh And this
is one of the problems that Marx stresses again
and again and again. Uh HOW under capitalism, the
only kinds of human powers that are developed for
many people uh are those that are necessary for
the pursuit of profit? Uh AND um efficiency within
firms, which means that the full range of human
powers that an individual might possess and might want
to develop uh never are, right? Uh And he
says that under communist society, uh the development of
human powers will no longer be a means the
way that it is under capitalism, right? A means
uh to economic efficiency and profit seeking. Uh BUT
it'll be an end in itself for the first
time. Uh And I think that all liberal socialists
are committed to very much the same vision. Uh
Just to give two examples. Again, we talked about
uh John Stuart Mill, right, continuously emphasized uh the
importance of individuals becoming full sighted uh and developing
themselves like living trees uh that kind of extend
uh to their natural parameters. Uh And arguing that
socialism was necessary to achieve that. Uh OR John
Raws, right? Talked about him a few seconds ago.
Uh John Rawls very much emphasizes what he calls
the Aristotelian principle in theory of justice. Uh WHERE
he says human beings very much like to exercise
their fundamental capacities. Uh AND they enjoy developing those
capacities and becoming better at higher order activities. Uh
Whether again, it's playing the violin or writing a
book or being a good father or a good
football player, whatever it happens to be. Uh And
he points out how a good society uh will
be committed to this Aristotelian principle in a very
robust way. So that's where I think you can
see a strong ethical symmetry uh between what's sometimes
called Marx's Aristotelian or Hegelian vision uh of human
development and liberal socialism's view of human development. Now,
in terms of where there can be some contrast
in the book, I point out how uh in
um the Communist Manifesto uh Marx and Engels argue
for uh what's sometimes called the form of democratic
centralism that was profoundly influential on people like Lennon,
right? This idea that you'd have uh a vanguard
party uh or a uh proletarian party that would
seize power and substantiate a dictatorship of the proletariat
for a brief period of time, uh erode uh
private ownership of the means of production and eventually
uh work one's way uh to communism. And I
point out that any liberal socialist would be very
critical of this idea of democratic centralism uh because
they'd be extremely anxious uh about allowing uh these
enormous powers to concentrate in the hands of a
single party, even a proletarian party. Uh And I
think that the 20th century uh has borne out
those anxieties very, very, very well, right? Uh WHATEVER
you think about Marxism, Leninism, uh or Maoism, very
few people would characterize the societies that they built
uh as democratic even if they were highly centralized
uh in certain kinds of ways. Uh Now I
point out in the book that Marx himself seems
to have drifted away uh from this political vision
uh of what communism would look like by the
time of pamphlets like uh the Civil War in
France. Um WHERE he points out instead actually, uh
what we have is a highly democratic, even hyper
democratic uh national Assembly uh where people could elect
representatives uh to operate on their half, but then
recall them uh at almost at any given moment.
Uh And this National Assembly would have certain kinds
of powers uh to govern for the nation. Uh
But a lot of powers would be devolved to
regional councils and regional assemblies. Uh That would be
for organizing production and organizing social life uh in
different towns and cities. Uh And if you think
about it, that makes an awful lot of sense,
right? Uh Marx wanted people to be involved in
their own self governance and be highly involved in
the production process. Uh The idea that this would
all be oriented by Paris or Berlin or wherever
it happens to be, uh would be an anemia
uh to this aspiration. Uh But again, he doesn't
really um defend this idea at any great length.
That's just kind of sketched out uh admiringly drawing
from the experience of the Congress Commune. Uh I
think it could certainly an improvement uh on uh
democratic centralism circa the Communist Manifesto. Uh But it
still has certain kind of foundational problems. Uh IN
particular, the liberal in me is wary of this
idea of giving uh the legislative branch of government
uh just sweeping powers to make changes without any
substantial checks imposed upon it uh by something like
say, a bill of Rights, for example. Uh So
again, I know I want to be too hard
on Marx um because many uh vulgarizes uh and
reactionaries uh have wildly distorted his work in ways
that are just unrecognizable and frankly, I think almost
illiterate. Uh, AND I'm a huge admirer of Marx.
I do think that there are problems, uh, with
this, uh, and it, if you're going to try
to make an argument for communism in the 21st
century it is incumbent upon you, uh, to, I
think, answer, uh, many people's anxieties, uh, about why
many people who marched under, um, that banner in
the past ended up marching people to some very
dark places.
Mhm uh So generally speaking, what would you say
are perhaps some of the main shortcomings of liberal
socialism?
Yeah, I'm very grateful that you asked that question
actually because um as I point out in the
book, uh and a few people have missed this
already. Uh That's just me being cranky. So I
apologize. Uh The book is not a defense of
liberal socialism uh but a retrieval of rebel socialism.
Uh So a retrieval is a term again uh
coined by cb mcpherson and refers to this historical
tendency to go back and to try to retrieve
um in a political tradition, egalitarian and Liberator impulses
and ideas that have maybe been forgotten um or
even actively sidelined. Uh And of course, I think
that liberal socialism is a Liberator and egalitarian doctrine
that is worth retrieving um well, for um intellectual
sake uh for intellectual reasons and also for political
reasons. Uh But I point out in the book
that it's not a defense of liberal socialism because
the reality is that liberal socialism in practice uh
was never really implemented in a particularly robust way.
Uh And where people tried to do so, uh
it largely failed. Uh And so if anyone wants
to identify with liberals socialism in the 21st century,
uh then starting at a theoretical level, we need
to ask ourselves, well, what are the fundamental problems
with this doctrine and how can we fix them?
Uh So, in the book, I highlight a few
problems uh with historical liberal socialist political theory. Uh
I'll just gesture towards two, right? Uh Right now,
uh First off, I agree with uh Sheldon Wolin
uh that thinkers like raws and thinkers like um
Mill have a very deficient understanding of the nature
of power, right? Uh They, if you compare their
understanding of power to the theorization of somebody like
um Karl Marx or Michelle Foucault or Wendy Brown
for that matter. Uh One of Roland's uh favorite
students. Uh It's just very clear that there's a
fundamental lack of sophistication uh and liberal socialist political
theory. Uh There's no really uh refined understanding of
ideology or discourse. Uh There's a very limited understanding
of subjectivism, how different kinds of subjectivities are created.
Uh YOU know, the different ways uh that media
can operate to disseminate ideological views of the way
that, you know, say adorno would speak, we would
talk about that very robustly. None of that really
comes into play. And I think that a liberal
socialism in the 20th century has to be way,
way, way more sophisticated on questions of power uh
than it was in the past. Um And I
think that we see some progress towards that now.
Uh PEOPLE like um Tommy Shelby or Charles Mills,
for example, uh who are two people I talk
about the end of the book are took pretty
foundational steps in that direction, but there's still a
long way to go. Uh The second thing that
I point out is that uh liberal socialists historically
have had a very deficient understanding of capital as
a kind of global system uh of governance and
a political economy. Uh VERY often liberal socialists will
focus almost uh manically uh on the state uh
as the kind of primary subject of justice. Uh
And you see that very clearly, for instance, if
somebody like John Rawls, right, John Rawls argues that
when we ruminate about justice is the basic structure,
basically the state uh that is the first subject
of justice. And in his work on things like
international relations or international justice, he just really does
not have very much of great interest to say.
Uh YOU can read the Laws of peoples and
it's not a particularly good book and it's definitely
not a very uh rich book compared to his
other works. Uh And this is not tolerable uh
when we recognize that capitalism, which any liberal socialist
has to be very critical of, is very much
a global system uh of political economy. Uh And
here again, I think is where liberal socialists have
a great deal to learn uh from Marxist theorists
uh like Nancy Frasier uh or Leo panic. Uh
It was at my alma mater passed away recently
uh to try to understand, you know, the way
that uh global finance interacts with American imperialism, interacts
with things like uh Western geopolitics, you name it
all that other stuff. Uh And then I guess
I'll cheat and actually add a third point, which
is that many liberal socialists uh historically have had
not had as much to say as they should
about issues of racial uh inequality in particular. Uh
A lot of liberal socialists are actually very good
on issues of gender inequality. Certainly for the time.
Uh AGAIN, think about somebody like Mary Wilson craft,
right? Uh As proto liberal socialist or John ST
Mill, right, who wrote a classic book, the subjection
of women, uh probably the only feminist classic I
could think of. Uh THAT was written by a
man. Uh But on issues of racial inequality, uh
many liberal socialists either had nothing of note to
say. Uh Sometimes they had peripherally good comments uh
like hoop houses, criticisms of imperialism, but nothing really
all that deep. Uh Or they even uh offered
racist apologetics uh for imperialism. Uh And for this
kind of chauvinistic western uh or white supremacist attitude
in the case of people like Mill. So we
need to be very, very critical of that in
the tradition of liberal socialism. Uh AND much more
aware of the different ways that racism precludes the
pursuit of uh economic equality and society is oriented
around non domination.
Yeah. So I need to ask you now, since
we now currently live under um under neo liberal
capitalism since the 19 eighties and with its rise
and its association with things like neoconservative foreign policy
and social conservative moralism. Um How does liberal socialism
relate to it?
Well, liberal socialism is extremely critical uh of neoliberalism,
right? Uh I don't know if I would go
as far as people like Michael Frieden uh in
arguing that neoliberalism uh self description, notwithstanding uh doesn't
even count as a species of liberalism. Uh Although
there are good arguments you can make to that
effect, right? Uh But I think that neoliberalism belongs
in the liberal family uh with the major caveat
being that uh even if neoliberalism belongs in the
same liberal family as liberal socialism, uh Anybody who
has been in a family will know that there
are many family members that you don't like. Uh
And very often times you'll have family members like
your uncle or your aunt, where you'll think God,
how are we even related, right? Uh So I
argue that neoliberalism uh its ideological roots can be
traced back to again what mcpherson called possessive individualism,
right? This idea that uh the proper way to
anthropologically understand individuals is this kind of in uh
atomic units, all competitive, all pursuing their self interest
without regard to one another. Uh AND ultimately uh
oriented by this acquisitive ethic. Uh THE idea that
acquiring more and gratifying more of one's desires uh
is the ultimate and in life. Uh What neoliberalism
adds to this interestingly enough, uh Wa Hayek especially
uh is that if you are actually go, if
you're going to create a society of people that
are committed uh to this Anthropic vision, uh We're
actually gonna need the states to play a much
more active role uh in producing the conditions uh
where people will act this way uh Than earlier
proponents of Laissez Faire uh would have thought was
appropriate. Uh So Hayek, for instance, and numerous works
uh used to say uh this idea of Laissez
Faire uh is a complete nonstarter. Uh NO liberal
as he understood them has ever been committed to
Laissez Faire, that is an anarchist position. Uh Every
liberal understands that the state needs to play a
very active role in creating the conditions uh for
what he thought an appropriate market society should look
like. And of course, this could take some pretty
dark turns. Uh If you think about, for instance,
uh Hayek support of things uh like uh Pinochet's
Chile uh where, you know, he famously would say
things like uh if the choice is between a
democratic socialism. Uh Ala Allende uh or an authoritarian
liberalism so-called really neoliberalism. Uh Ala Pinochet. Uh Then,
absolutely. Uh I'm in favor of an authoritarian neoliberalism.
Uh AND liberal socialist uh would be very critical
of that from a theoretical down to a political
level. Right? Uh Obviously, we have very different understandings
of how individuals flourish uh via this commitment to
methodological collectivism and normative individualism. Uh We have very
different understandings of the kind of political institutions that
would be required uh to secure people's liberty. Uh
And liberal socialists, I would argue are far more
sensitive uh to how economic forms of domination and
subordination uh are in many ways the most impactful
forms uh of domination that people experience. Uh And
that a good liberal society needs to not just
protect them against that. Uh But actually needs to
empower them uh to seize control of their economic
destiny for themselves rather than having their economic destiny
be basically held by capitalists.
Yeah. So, uh when I asked you about the
shortcomings of liberal socialism, one of the topics you
mentioned was racism. What is black, liberal socialism? And
what would you say it adds to the overall
picture of liberal socialism?
Yeah, absolutely. So, uh one of the chapters in
the book that I'm most fond of uh is
a chapter on a man called Charles Mills uh
who probably is less well known to many people
uh certainly than uh Karl Marx and John Rawls,
uh which uh is a real shame. Uh So
Charles Mill uh Mills uh started off as a
Marxist uh later drifted towards becoming what he called
a black radical liberal uh for a variety of
different reasons. Uh But probably his most famous book
is a book called The Racial Contract uh where
he pointed out that there's long been these apologies
uh for liberalism that have been put forward, uh
Certainly from the 19 sixties onward, that suggests, uh,
look liberal is liberals here and there, uh might
have endorsed the odd racist view, might have endorsed
the odd uh bit of imperialism here or there.
Uh But for the most part, they were pretty
good on issues of race. Uh And even where
they weren't, uh, racism is in no way a
um predominant feature uh of the liberal tradition and
certainly not a predominant feature uh of any major
liberals thought. Uh AND mills really challenged this view
quite foundation, uh where he pointed out that if
you read the works of someone like Emmanuel can't,
for example, uh they are saturated uh with certain
kinds of racial supers, presuppositions, uh can't even developed
an elaborate, I don't say that as a positive
uh racial typology, uh ranking different races. Uh AND
again, implying very heavily, uh that some of them
uh were just in a immature state, uh and
almost incapable of self governance. Uh And he points
out that, you know, John Stuart Mill, who again,
I write admiringly about uh was a fierce proponent
of euro imperialism. Uh ARGUING that this would be
to the benefit uh of many peoples in the
world because they were also were not capable of
self governance. Uh And so having the British uh
run their societies for them uh would help them
mature uh or for a sufficiently long period of
time. And I think that Charles Mills uh analysis
of the subject matters is eye opening, right? Uh
And revealing just how much the liberal tradition has
to answer for on the front of racial inequality.
Uh Now, mill identifying as a black radical liberal
uh is not rejecting the liberal tradition, right? He
says, look, uh the principles that people like John
Rawls espoused can't espouse are all sound. Uh But
we need to recognize that they never extended them
in any meaningful way uh to racialized groups that
they regarded as their inferiors. And very obviously, contemporary
liberals need to do that. Uh And if we're
going to do that seriously, it's gonna entail two
different things. Uh First off, it's going to mean
acknowledging that many liberals were racist uh and endorse
racist policies. Uh And we need to be attentive
and mindful of that history. Uh And second, we
need to recognize that liberal societies might need to
engage in reparative activities uh to try to offset
uh the consequences of long histories of racism. Whether
in the United States or the Caribbean Islands. Uh
Right. You know, um Charles Mills was Caribbean uh
or elsewhere. Right. Uh And I think that there's
a lot to this. Uh UNFORTUNATELY, Charles Mills passed
away quite recently actually. Uh WHEN he was just
really um starting to develop the program of black
radical liberalism uh in books like uh Black rights
white wrongs. Uh AND his essay on We Du
Bois. Uh But in terms of the socialist dimension
of this, uh in his essay on We Du
Bois. Uh AND in some of the writings in
the aforementioned book, uh he says, look, Black radical
liberalism will obviously be a species of left liberalism
economically. Uh It's incompatible with command economic socialism. Uh
But probably not economic uh sorry, incompatible with market
socialism. Uh And he starts to say that's probably
what we should do economically uh again, sadly, passed
away before we started to see more of this.
Uh WHICH I'm personally quite sad about because I
would have been very interested in it. Uh But
uh he lays out a preliminary schema uh that
I'm hoping that future scholars might pick up if
they're interested uh in developing black radicalism more for.
So I have one last question then, uh how
do you look at the future of liberal socialism?
Do you have any specific traditions about how it
would evolve in the future?
Well, I am optimistic, intellectually and pessimistic politically uh
which truthfully is not a great position to be
in. So I'd much rather be optimistic politically and
pessimistic intellectually. I'm optimistic intellectually because I think that
there's been a real surge of interest in if
not liberal socialism, at least something that looks a
lot like it. Uh Just to list off a
couple of uh examples. Uh PEOPLE like Samuel Moyne
and Elizabeth Anderson and Daniel Chandler and Helen mccabe
and Eagle Shirt Broad. Uh Helena Rosenblatt have all
produced very interesting books recently. Uh ARGUING for revisiting
the liberal tradition, recognizing how much of a debt
it many liberal figures owe socialism. Uh OR even
arguing overtly for various forms uh of liberal socialism.
If we think about people like uh Will Edmondson
with his recent book, um John Stri Mill Redis
Socialist for Cambridge University Press. So I think that
intellectually we're in really great shape, right? Uh There's
some very exciting work that's being done in economics,
political theory, um Cultural theory, you name it. Uh
And I think that if allowed to continue, uh
the future will be bright from an academic, scholarly
and uh intellectual standpoint politically though the reality is
that it's the far right. Uh THAT is ascendant
all around the globe right now. Uh By the
time, you know, this airs the US election will
be done, uh It's possible that Donald Trump will
be defeated. It's also very possible he might have
won. Uh But whatever the case is, uh the
fact that this is such a close election, uh
really demonstrates that there's a mass appeal uh to
a lot of far, right, illiberal ideas. Uh And
I guess it's a good place to close because
the reality is, I think that if the far
right is ascended everywhere, uh, liberals have only themselves
to blame for that and I include myself in
this. Uh And that is because for decades now,
uh liberals have been committed to neo liberal policies
that were uninspired in theory and proved enormously uninspiring
in practice. Uh And if people are rejecting liberalism
for being coextensive with neoliberalism, uh you can't really
blame them because liberals did not offer a sense
that hope for a better society was genuinely possible.
Uh This is a point that Sam Moyne makes
beautifully in his book, Liberalism Against Its Health, the
way he points out if liberals are not able
to offer people en masse a sense of hope
for the future, uh Then we are unlikely to
see our creed survive into the 21st century. Uh
And the sad reality is that survival is not
good enough. Uh We need to not just inspire
uh this feeling that liberalism is the best of
very bad alternatives. Uh But something that actually should
inspire love uh and inspire passion. Uh And I
think that liberal socialism is a liberalism of hope.
It does offer a vision for a better future.
All the problems that I pointed out in the
tradition. Notwithstanding, I think it is worth worth giving
a chance to. Uh AND I would hope that
people would take it seriously as a political doctrine
uh and try to find ways to instantiate it
in practice because I think that something very much
like it is needed if we're going to prevent
the far right from gaining power everywhere in the
21st century.
Great. So the book is again, the Political Theory
of liberal socialism. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of the interview and Doctor mcmanus
just before we go apart from the book, where
can people find you on the internet?
Sure. If people want, they can email me uh
Matt mcmanus 300 at gmail.com. Uh I do my
best to answer emails. Uh So if I don't
respond to you, it might just be that you
wound up in spam. So send it again. I'll
do my best uh or they can add me
on uh Twitter uh at Matt Pulp Prof. Um
And again, I try to be pretty responsive to
those things. So get in touch with me. Happy
to chat if uh you're interested.
Yeah. So thank you so much for doing this.
It's been a very informative conversation. So thank you
for coming on the show.
Yeah. Thanks a lot, Ricardo. It's great talking to
you and uh hopefully we'll chat again sometime.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs called in Holbrook Field Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and La Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S friends, David Wilson
Yasa, dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte,
Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt Pavlo. Stass Nale Me,
Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Bela Gil Cortes Solis Scott Zachary FTW, Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa,
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley. Man George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik,
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Kan and
Rosie. Thank you for all.